Refresh Handbook pages (#79)
Vanilla-OS/handbook: _posts/2023-01-11-install-and-manage-applications.md

## Introduction

Vanilla OS allows installing packages and software from various sources. This guide will discuss them in detail.

> Vanilla OS comes with the option to enable Flatpak, AppImage and Snap in the initial setup. It also allows the installation of native packages using the `apx` package manager. (**_Note_**: At the time of writing this guide, Snap is not yet supported in Vanilla OS)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vanilla OS comes with the option to enable Flatpak, AppImage and Snap in the initial setup. It also allows the installation of native packages using the `apx` package manager. (**_Note_**: Snap is currently not supported in Vanilla OS)
```
In my opinion the `at the time of writing this guide` is not really useful in this case as it could give the impression that it may work when the user is reading the guide.

## Terminologies

- **Flatpak**:- Flatpak is a popular packaging format allowing the installation of Desktop applications in a sandboxed environment isolated from the system with shared libraries between them. Flatpak provides developers with a unified way to distribute apps for most GNU/Linux distributions. Flatpak supports adding various remote repositories, the most popular repository being Flathub.

- **Flathub**:- Flathub is the largest repository of Flatpak applications spanning various categories.

> - **Snap**:- Snap is an alternative packaging format by Canonical (the creators of Ubuntu) for installing thousands of applications from the Snapcraft repository. They facilitate installing applications in Servers and various GNU/Linux distributions. Snapcraft contains hundreds of verified packages and software from publishers. (**_Note_**: At the time of writing this guide, Snap is not yet supported in Vanilla OS)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Snap**:- Snap is an alternative packaging format by Canonical (the creators of Ubuntu) for installing thousands of applications from the Snapcraft repository. They facilitate installing applications in Servers and various GNU/Linux distributions. Snapcraft contains hundreds of verified packages and software from publishers. (**_Note_**: Snap is currently not supported in Vanilla OS)
```
Same thing as in the first comment

- **DNF**:- `dnf` (Dandified YUM) is the successor to YUM. It is a powerful package manager for installing and managing applications on rpm-based distributions. 

- **AUR**:- `aur` (Arch User Repository) is the largest community-maintained repository with thousands of native packages for Arch Linux and its derivatives.

- **APK**:- `apk` (Alpine Linux package keeper) is a package manager which allows installing and managing applications on Alpine Linux.

- **ZYPPER**:- `zypper` is a package manager on openSUSE for installing, updating and removing packages, and also for managing repositories.

- **XBPS**:- `xbps` (X Binary Package System) is a fast package manager on Void Linux that has been designed and implemented from scratch for efficiently managing your packages.

- **NIX**:- `nix` is a powerful package manager for Linux and other Unix systems that makes package management reliable and reproducible.

- **DEB**:- `deb` (Debian Packages) is a file format for installing and managing applications on Debian-based systems. It's an equivalent file extension to `.exe` in Windows and `.rpm` in GNU/Linux.

> - **RPM**:- `rpm` (Red Hat package manager) is a file format for installing and managing applications on Red Hat-based systems. It's an equivalent file extension to `.exe` in Windows and `.deb` in GNU/Linux.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **RPM**:- `rpm` (Red Hat package manager) is a file format for installing and managing applications on RHEL-based systems. It's an equivalent file extension to `.exe` in Windows and `.deb` in GNU/Linux.
```
This should be `RHEL` or `Red Hat Enterprise Linux`

## Managing Applications through GNOME Software

### Installing Applications

Flatpaks and Snaps can be installed with ease using GNOME Software. It is the recommended method for installing packages.

![GNOME Software](/assets/uploads/Applications_Post/gnome-software-43.webp)

### Searching Applications

You can search for applications in GNOME Software by clicking on the Search icon in the top left corner.

If the application you searched for exists, it will be displayed, and you can proceed with the installation.

If the application you searched for does not exist, you can use an alternative method suggested below in this guide to install it.

### Updating Applications

> Updates are visible in the `Updates` panel in GNOME Software. In Vanilla OS, Updates are available for Flatpaks, Snaps and System Packages through it.

Reviewer: Not entirely sure how to phrase this differently, but the `through it` part seems off

Automatic Updates are configured in the `Update Preferences` tab located in the burger menu in the top right corner.

![GNOME Software Update Proferences](/assets/uploads/Applications_Post/gnome-software-update-preferences.webp)

### Removing Applications

> You can remove the installed Flatpaks and Snaps from the `Installed` panel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can remove installed Flatpaks and Snaps from the `Installed` panel.
```

(**_Note_**: Some native applications installed on the host cannot be removed using this method)

## Manage AppImages

### Installing AppImages

> You can download AppImages from project pages on GitHub. Once downloaded, they won't have to be installed since they are executable binaries.

Reviewer: Maybe mentioning [appimagehub](https://www.appimagehub.com/) is useful here?

Author: I personally think appimagehub is inherently against what AppImage is trying to achieve, so I'm not sure whether it should be listed as an "official" source.

Reviewer: I don't think it really is against the goals of AppImage, since it's just a new source for AppImages, not the main or centralized source for them.

### Running AppImages

If you have enabled AppImage in the first setup, you can run AppImages graphically by following these steps:-

- Right-click on the file, then click on **Properties**.
    
![AppImages Properties](/assets/uploads/Applications_Post/appimages-nautilus-properties.webp)
    
- Enable the **Executable as Program** option.

You can now run the AppImage by right-clicking it and pressing run or by pressing enter/return key on your keyboard.

Alternatively, you can open AppImages from the terminal with the following commands:-

```bash
cd <directory>
chmod +x <file>.appimage
./<file>.appimage
```

**_Note_**:- `chmod +x <file>.AppImage` makes the file executable.

## Managing Flatpaks through CLI

If you enabled Flatpak in the First Setup, you won't have to do anything. If you have disabled Flatpak in the First Setup, follow the guide [**here**](/2022/12/09/install-flatpaks.html).

### Installing Flatpaks

You can install Flatpaks with the following command:-

```bash

> flatpak install <remote> <application-id>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
flatpak install <application-id>
```
I would leave out the `<remote>` part since not everyone knows what to put there and users will be prompted for the remote to use if there are matches in multiple remotes.
